<h1><i>An Enquiry concerning Human Understanding</i></h1>
<h2>Section 2. Of the Origins of Ideas</h2>
<p id="perceptionback">[E 2.1] Every one will readily allow, that there is a considerable difference between the <a href="#perception">perceptions</a> of the mind, when a man feels the pain of excessive heat, or the pleasure of moderate warmth, and when he afterwards recalls to his memory this sensation, or anticipates it by his imagination. These faculties may mimic or copy the perceptions of the senses; but they never can entirely reach the force and vivacity of the original sentiment. The utmost we say of them, even when they operate with greatest vigour, is, that they represent their object in so lively a manner, that we could almost say we feel or see it: But, except the mind be disordered by disease or madness, they never can arrive at such a pitch of vivacity, as to render these perceptions altogether undistinguishable. All the colours of poetry, however splendid, can never paint natural objects in such a manner as to make the description be taken for a real landskip. The most lively thought is still inferior to the dullest sensation.</p>

<p>[E 2.2] We may observe a like distinction to run through all the other perceptions of the mind. A man in a fit of anger, <i><span title="Here, Hume points to a difference in how impressions and ideas behave: an anger-impression causes certain kinds of actions (“actuates us”) that a mere idea of anger would not cause. This passage therefore provides support for the view that differences in degree of “force and vivacity” are differences in functional role, i.e. differences in how perceptions behave within the mind. See the glossary entry for ‘Force and Vivacity (or Liveliness)’.">is actuated in a very different manner</span></i> from one who only thinks of that emotion. If you tell me, that any person is in love, I easily understand your meaning, and form a just conception of his situation; but never can mistake that conception for the real disorders and agitations of the passion. When we reflect on our past sentiments and affections, our thought is a faithful mirror, and copies its objects truly; but <i><span title="Here, Hume points to a difference in what it is like to have impressions and ideas: having an idea is a “faint[er] and dull[er]” experience than having an impression. This passage therefore provides support for the view that differences in degree of “force and vivacity” are differences in phenomenology, i.e. differences in what it is like to have perceptions. See the glossary entry for ‘Force and Vivacity (or Liveliness)’.">the colours which it employs are faint and dull,</span></i> in comparison of those in which our original perceptions were clothed. It requires no nice discernment or metaphysical head to mark the distinction between them.</p>

<p id="ideaback">[E 2.3] Here therefore we may divide all the perceptions of the mind into two classes or species, which <i><span title="Hume’s claim that impressions and ideas “are distinguished by” their different degrees of force and vivacity is ambiguous. On one hand, Hume might mean that differences in force and vivacity are how we know whether we are having an impression or an idea. In that case, he is making an epistemological claim. On the other hand, Hume might mean that differences in force and vivacity are constitutive of the difference between impressions and ideas—in other words, that what it is for perception x to be an impression is for x to have a high degree of force and vivacity. In that case, he is making a metaphysical claim. Of course, Hume might mean to make both claims—they are consistent with each other.">are distinguished by</span></i> their different degrees of <a href="#force">force and vivacity</a>. The less forcible and lively are commonly denominated Thoughts or <a href="#idea">Ideas</a>. The other species want a name in our language, and in most others; I suppose, because it was not requisite for any, but philosophical purposes, to rank them under a general term or appellation. Let us, therefore, use a little freedom, and call them <a href="#impression">Impressions</a>; employing that word in a sense somewhat different from the usual. By the term impression, then, I mean all our more lively perceptions, when we hear, or see, or feel, or love, or hate, or desire, or will. And impressions are distinguished from ideas, which are the less lively perceptions, of which we are conscious, when we reflect on any of those sensations or movements above mentioned.</p>

<p>[E 2.4] Nothing, at first view, may seem more unbounded than the thought of man, which not only escapes all human power and authority, but is not even restrained within the limits of nature and reality. To form monsters, and join incongruous shapes and appearances, costs the imagination no more trouble than to conceive the most natural and familiar objects. And while the body is confined to one planet, along which it creeps with pain and difficulty; the thought can in an instant transport us into the most distant regions of the universe; or even beyond the universe, into the unbounded chaos, where nature is supposed to lie in total confusion. What never was seen, or heard of, may yet be conceived; <i><span title="This passage introduces an important principle of Hume’s philosophy: whatever is distinctly conceivable (i.e., whatever we have the “power” to think distinctly about) is non-contradictory. Hume also holds that whatever is non-contradictory is “possible, at least in a metaphysical sense” (A 11). Taken together, these principles imply that whatever is distinctly conceivable is metaphysically possible (A 11, E 4.2). Scholars often call this italicized proposition Hume’s Conceivability Principle.">nor is any thing beyond the power of thought, except what implies an absolute contradiction.</span></i></p>

<p>[E 2.5] But though our thought seems to possess this unbounded liberty, we shall find, upon a nearer examination, that it is really confined within very narrow limits, and that all this creative power of the mind amounts to no more than the faculty of compounding, transposing, augmenting, or diminishing the materials afforded us by the senses and experience. <i><span title="This passage implicitly distinguishes simple ideas from complex ideas. The idea of a golden mountain is a complex idea. See the Glossary entry on ‘Idea’.">When we think of a golden mountain, we only join two consistent ideas, gold, and mountain, with which we were formerly acquainted.</span></i> A virtuous horse we can conceive; because, from our own feeling, we can conceive virtue; and this we may unite to the figure and shape of a horse, which is an animal familiar to us. In short, all the materials of thinking are derived either from our outward or inward sentiment: The mixture and composition of these belongs alone to the mind and will. Or, to express myself in philosophical language, <i><span title="This principle is often called Hume’s Copy Principle. Strictly speaking, it should be restricted to simple ideas. A complex idea, like that of a golden mountain (see above) need not be directly copied from an impression. However, Hume’s Composition Principle (see below) says that every complex idea is ultimately composed of finitely many simple ideas, and nothing else. Taken together, these two principles imply that every idea is ultimately composed of impression-copies.">all our ideas or more feeble perceptions are copies of our impressions or more lively ones.</span></i></p>

<p>[E 2.6] To prove this, the two following arguments will, I hope, be sufficient. <i><span title="This sentence implicitly introduces Hume’s Composition Principle, i.e. the principle that every complex idea is ultimately composed of finitely many simple ideas, and nothing else.">First, when we analyse our thoughts or ideas, however compounded or sublime, we always find, that they resolve themselves into such simple ideas as were copied from a precedent feeling or sentiment.</span></i> Even those ideas, which, at first view, seem the most wide of this origin, are found, upon a nearer scrutiny, to be derived from it. <i><span title="Hume claims that the idea of God (an infinitely intelligent, wise, and good being) is created by concatenating ideas copied from impressions of our own finite intelligence, wisdom and goodness. So, we get our idea of God only after we get ideas of our own minds. In contrast, Descartes argues in the Third Meditation that we must have an idea of God before we get ideas of our own minds (or selves): “[M]y perception of the infinite, that is God, is in some way prior to my perception of the finite, that is myself. For how could I understand that I doubted or desired—that is, lacked something—and that I was not wholly perfect, unless there were in me some idea of a more perfect being which enabled me to recognize my own defects by comparison?” (Descartes 1984, p.31). Can Hume satisfactorily defend his view against Descartes’s argument? If so, how?">The idea of God, as meaning an infinitely intelligent, wise, and good Being, arises from reflecting on the operations of our own mind, and augmenting, without limit, those qualities of goodness and wisdom.</span></i> We may prosecute this enquiry to what length we please; where we shall always find, that every idea which we examine is copied from a similar impression. Those who would assert, that this position is not universally true nor without exception, have only one, and that an easy method of refuting it; by producing that idea, which, in their opinion, is not derived from this source. It will then be incumbent on us, if we would maintain our doctrine, to produce the impression or lively perception, which corresponds to it.</p>

<p>[E 2.7] Secondly, If it happen, from a defect of the organ, that a man is not susceptible of any species of sensation, we always find, that he is as little susceptible of the correspondent ideas. A blind man can form no notion of colours; a deaf man of sounds. Restore either of them that sense, in which he is deficient; by opening this new inlet for his sensations, you also open an inlet for the ideas; and he finds no difficulty in conceiving these objects. The case is the same, if the object, proper for exciting any sensation, has never been applied to the organ. A Laplander or Negro, has no notion of the relish of wine. And though there are few or no instances of a like deficiency in the mind, where a person has never felt or is wholly incapable of a sentiment or passion that belongs to his species; yet we find the same observation to take place in a less degree. A man of mild manners can form no idea of inveterate revenge or cruelty; nor can a selfish heart easily conceive the heights of friendship and generosity. It is readily allowed, that other beings may possess many senses of which we can have no conception; because the ideas of them have never been introduced to us, in the only manner, by which an idea can have access to the mind, to wit, by the actual feeling and sensation.</p>

<p id="shadeback">[E 2.8] There is, however, one contradictory phenomenon, which may prove, that it is not absolutely impossible for ideas to arise, independent of their correspondent impressions. I believe it will readily be allowed, that the several distinct ideas of colour, which enter by the eye, or those of sound, which are conveyed by the ear, are really different from each other; though, at the same time, resembling. Now if this be true of different colours, it must be no less so of the different shades of the same colour; and each shade produces a distinct idea, independent of the rest. For if this should be denied, it is possible, by the continual gradation of shades, to run a colour insensibly into what is most remote from it; and if you will not allow any of the means to be different, you cannot, without absurdity, deny the extremes to be the same. <i><span title="This passage presents a famous thought experiment. Hume invites us to imagine someone who has experienced every shade of blue except one intermediate shade (the “missing shade”). He then invites us to imagine that we present this person with all the shades that she has seen, arranged from darkest to lightest. Could she imagine (form an idea of) the missing shade, even though she has never experienced it first-hand, i.e. never had an impression of it? Hume thinks that, when we consider this thought experiment, we will have the intuition that yes, she could imagine the missing shade.  Puzzlingly, Hume says both (i) her idea of the missing shade of blue is a counterexample to the Copy Principle, and (ii) this counterexample does not matter and we can use the Copy Principle as if it had no counterexamples. Some readers think he is mistaken about (i). Others think he is mistaken about (ii). And others argue that Hume is right about both (i) and (ii). What is your view of this matter, and why?">Suppose, therefore, a person to have enjoyed his sight for thirty years, and to have become perfectly acquainted with colours of all kinds, except one particular shade of blue, for instance, which it never has been his fortune to meet with. Let all the different shades of that colour, except that single one, be placed before him, descending gradually from the deepest to the lightest; it is plain, that he will perceive a blank, where that shade is wanting, and will be sensible, that there is a greater distance in that place between the contiguous colours than in any other. Now I ask, whether it be possible for him, from his own imagination, to supply this deficiency, and raise up to himself the idea of that particular shade, though it had never been conveyed to him by his senses? I believe there are few but will be of opinion that he can:</span></i> And this may serve as a proof, that the simple ideas are not always, in every instance, derived from the correspondent impressions; though this instance is so singular, that it is scarcely worth our observing, and does not merit, that for it alone we should alter our general maxim.</p>

<p id="abstractback">[E 2.9] <i><span title="Here, Hume says that the Copy Principle (and the Composition Principle) can be used to clarify obscure ideas. In E 7, Hume uses the Copy Principle and the Composition Principle to clarify the (initially) obscure idea of a “necessary connexion” between a cause and its effect.">Here, therefore, is a proposition, which not only seems, in itself, simple and intelligible; but, if a proper use were made of it, might render every dispute equally intelligible, and banish all that jargon, which has so long taken possession of metaphysical reasonings, and drawn disgrace upon them.</span></i> All ideas, especially <a href="#abstract">abstract ones</a>, are naturally faint and obscure: The mind has but a slender hold of them: they are apt to be confounded with other resembling ideas; and when we have often employed any term, though without a distinct meaning, we are apt to imagine it has a determinate idea, annexed to it. On the contrary, all impressions, that is, all sensations, either outward or inward, are strong and vivid: The limits between them are more exactly determined: Nor is it easy to fall into any error or mistake with regard to them. When we entertain, therefore, any suspicion, that a philosophical term is employed without any meaning or idea (as is but too frequent), we need but enquire, from what impression is that supposed idea derived? And if it be impossible to assign any, this will serve to confirm our suspicion. By bringing ideas into so clear a light, we may reasonably hope to remove all dispute, which may arise, concerning their nature and reality. <a href="#note">[1]</a></p>

<br><h2>Hume’s Endnotes</h2>

<p id="note">E 2.9n1</p>
<p>[E 2.9n1.1] It is probable that no more was meant by those, who denied <a href="#innate">innate ideas</a>, than that all ideas were copies of our impressions; though it must be confessed, that the terms, which they employed, were not chosen with such caution, nor so exactly defined, as to prevent all mistakes about their doctrine. For what is meant by innate? If innate be equivalent to natural, then all the perceptions and ideas of the mind must be allowed to be innate or natural, in whatever sense we take the latter word, whether in opposition to what is uncommon, artificial, or miraculous. If by innate be meant, contemporary to our birth, the dispute seems to be frivolous; nor is it worth while to enquire at what time thinking begins, whether before, at, or after our birth. Again, the word idea, seems to be commonly taken in a very loose sense, by Locke and others: as standing for any of our perceptions, our sensations and passions, as well as thoughts. Now in this sense, I should desire to know, what can be meant by asserting, that self-love, or resentment of injuries, or the passion between the sexes is not innate?</p>
<p>[E2.9n1.2] But admitting these terms, impressions and ideas, in the sense above explained, and understanding by innate, what is original or copied from no precedent perception, then may we assert, that all our impressions are innate and our ideas not innate.</p>
<p>[E 2.9n1.3] To be ingenuous, I must own it to be my opinion, that Mr. Locke was betrayed into this question by the schoolmen, who, making use of undefined terms, draw out their disputes to a tedious length, without ever touching the point in question. A like ambiguity and circumlocution seem to run through all that great philosopher's reasonings on this as well as most other subjects. <a href="#abstractback">BACK</a></p>

<br><h2>Glossary of Key Terms</h2>

<p><h3>Abstract Idea</h3></p>
<p>See Idea, Abstract.</p>

<br>

<p id="force"><h3>Force and Vivacity (or Liveliness)</h3></p>
<p>In Hume’s view, impressions and ideas differ only in their degree of a quantity that he calls “force and vivacity” or “force and liveliness”. Impressions are more forceful and vivacious, ideas less so. For Hume, then, thinking about a landscape you have seen is just like experiencing that landscape first-hand, save that your thought (idea) is less forceful and vivacious than your first-hand experience (impression) was. How plausible is this view? The answer will depend on what ‘force’ and ‘vivacity’ mean. In the literature, two main answers are defended. According to Don Garrett (2006, 2015), ‘force’ and ‘vivacity’ concern phenomenology, i.e. what it is like to have a perception. When Hume says that impressions are more forceful and vivacious than ideas, he is telling us that what it is like to have an impression differs from what it is like to have an idea. According to Steven Everson (1988), ‘force’ and ‘vivacity’ concern functional role, i.e. how a perception behaves in our mind. When Hume says that impressions are more forceful and vivacious than ideas, he is telling us that impressions behave differently from ideas: for example, the visual experience of a tiger in your room (an impression) would motivate you very differently from a mere thought about a tiger in your room (an idea). <a href="#ideaback">BACK</a></p>

<br>

<p id="impression"><h3>Impression</h3></p>
<p>According to Hume, there are two kinds of perceptions: (i) a highly forceful and vivacious (or lively) kind; and (ii) a less forceful and vivacious kind. ‘Impression’ is his label for perceptions of the first kind, (i). In the Treatise, Hume admits that this label is imperfect: it seems to tell us something about the perception’s causal origin (that it was impressed upon the subject from without), but Hume says that he doesn’t mean to prejudge what our “impressions” (perhaps they are caused from within our mind) (T 1.1.1.1n2). According to Hume, impressions are the building blocks of our first-hand experiences, whereas ideas are the building blocks of our thoughts. He says that the following kinds of perceptions are highly forceful and lively, hence are examples of impressions: perceptual experiences, such as visual and tactile experiences; bodily sensations, such as feelings of bodily pain and pleasure; emotional experiences, such as a feeling of love or a feeling of anger; and the “sentiments” of approval (or disapproval) that we feel towards virtuous (or vicious) people. <a href="#ideaback">BACK</a></p>

<br>

<p id="idea"><h3>Idea</h3></p>
<p>According to Hume, there are two kinds of perceptions: (i) a highly forceful and vivacious (or lively) kind; and (ii) a less forceful and vivacious kind. He calls the second kind of perceptions ideas. According to Hume, ideas are the building blocks of our thoughts, whereas impressions are the building blocks of our first-hand experiences. Ideas are either simple or complex. A simple idea has no mental parts; it is a mental atom. A complex idea has parts: it is composed of other ideas; so, it is a mental molecule. For example, the idea of a golden mountain is complex: it is composed of the idea of gold, and the idea of a mountain. Ultimately, a complex idea is entirely made up of finitely many simple ideas. <a href="#ideaback">BACK</a></p>

<br>

<p id="abstract"><h3>Idea, Abstract</h3></p>
<p>An abstract or general idea represents not just one individual thing, but everything of a certain kind. For example, the abstract idea of a horse represents all horses (everything of the kind horse); the abstract idea of a triangle represents all triangles (everything of the kind triangle); and so forth. These ideas pose a puzzle for Hume: according to him, all ideas ultimately derive from impressions; but we never have an impression of all horses, only of the individual horses we happen to encounter; how, then, can we form abstract or general ideas? At E 12.20n34, Hume suggests an answer: “there is no such thing as abstract or general ideas, properly speaking; but that all general ideas are, in reality, particular ones, attached to a general term, which recalls, upon occasion, other particular ones, that resemble, in certain circumstances, the idea, present to the mind”. In other words: When you think about all horses, you do so by forming an idea of a particular horse (say, Bucephalus). This idea is associated with the general word ‘horse’; and that word is, in turn, associated with many other ideas of particular horses (Black Beauty, Red Rum, etc.). These associations allow your idea of Bucephalus to serve as a kind of proxy for all horses. You therefore count as thinking about all horses, even though the idea before your mind is only of one particular horse. <a href="#abstractback">BACK</a></p>

<br>

<p id="innate"><h3>Idea, Innate</h3></p>
<p>Some philosophers hold that we have “innate” ideas. The English philosopher John Locke had argued against this view, at length, in his Essay concerning Human Understanding. Hume points out that the meaning of ‘innate’ is unclear. He distinguishes several things that it might mean. On his preferred definition, ‘innate’ means copied from no previous perception. (He should really say: ‘innate’ means neither copied from a previous perception nor entirely composed of perceptions that are copies. Otherwise, complex ideas like that of a golden mountain will count as innate.) When we use ‘innate’ with this definition, Hume would say that all of our impressions are innate, and that no ideas are innate, since all ideas are either copied from previous perceptions (as in the case of simple ideas) or entirely composed of perceptions that are copies (as in the case of complex ideas). <a href="#note">BACK</a></p>

<br>

<p><h3>Innate Idea</h3></p>
<p>See Idea, Innate.</p>

<br>

<p><h3>Liveliness</h3></p>
<p>See Force and Vivacity (or Liveliness).</p>

<br>

<p id="perception"><h3>Perception</h3></p>
<p>In Hume’s view, a person’s mental life is built out of “perceptions”. To begin with, it is probably easiest to think of “perceptions” as particular mental events. For example, my feeling a headache at 6:03pm on 31st August, 2020 is a perception that was (at that time) a building block of my mental life; Norman Kemp Smith’s thinking about Hume at noon on 2nd April, 1905 (supposing that event occurred) is a perception that was (at that time) a building block of Kemp Smith’s mental life; and your experiencing the words on this screen right now is a perception that is (right now) a building block of your mental life. I say that “perceptions” are particular (or individual) to contrast them with universals. Suppose that you and I both have headaches right now. My feeling a headache now is one perception (one particular mental event); it is just in my mind, not in yours; only I have this particular perception. Your feeling a headache now is a second perception (a second particular mental event), numerically distinct from mine; it is just in your mind, not in mine; only you have this particular perception. In contrast, the property of having a headache is a universal, i.e. something that can be instantiated or exemplified by diverse things. This property is common to both of us: you and I both have (or instantiate, or exemplify) this property. So, “perceptions” are not mental properties. Perceptions divide into two kinds: impressions and ideas. <a href="#perceptionback">BACK</a></p>

<br>

<p id="shade"><h3>Shade of Blue, aka The Missing Shade of Blue</h3></p>
<p>The shade of blue that Hume discusses in E 2.8, which is widely known as  “the missing shade of blue”, is an element in a thought experiment that Hume proposes. He invites us to imagine someone who has experienced every shade of blue except one intermediate shade (the “missing shade”). He then invites us to imagine that we present this person with all the shades that she has seen, arranged from darkest to lightest. Could she imagine (form an idea of) the missing shade, even though she has never experienced it first-hand, i.e. never had an impression of it? Hume thinks that, when we consider this thought experiment, we will have the intuition that yes, she could imagine the missing shade.  Puzzlingly, Hume says both (i) her idea of the missing shade of blue is a counterexample to the Copy Principle, and (ii) this counterexample does not matter and we can use the Copy Principle as if it had no counterexamples. Some readers think he is mistaken about (i). Others think he is mistaken about (ii). And others argue that Hume is right about both (i) and (ii). What is your view of this matter, and why? <a href="#shadeback">BACK</a></p>

<br>

<h1>Works Cited</h1>

<p>Everson, Steven. <a href="https://www-jstor-org.ezproxy.is.ed.ac.uk/stable/2255082?sid=primo&seq=1#metadata_info_tab_contents">“The Difference between Feeling and Thinking”</a>. Mind 97(387) (1988), pp.401–13.</p>

<p>Garrett, Don. <a href="https://www.taylorfrancis.com/books/9780203118351"><i>Hume</i></a>. (New York: Routledge, 2015)</p>

<p>Hume, David. <a href=https://www-oxfordscholarlyeditions-com.ezproxy.is.ed.ac.uk/view/10.1093/actrade/9780199596331.book.1/actrade-9780199596331-book-1><i>A Treatise of Human Nature</i></a>. Two vols. Edited by David Fate Norton and Mary J. Norton. (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2007)</p>

<p>Hume, David. An Abstract of a Book Lately Published. In David Hume, <a href=https://www-oxfordscholarlyeditions-com.ezproxy.is.ed.ac.uk/view/10.1093/actrade/9780199596331.book.1/actrade-9780199596331-book-1><i>A Treatise of Human Nature, Vol, 1: Texts</i></a>. Edited by David Fate Norton and Mary J. Norton. (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2007)</p>



